I want to tell everybody watching and
listening the Michaela school is not a
selective school and that means anybody
can go there and see usually schools
perform well if they hyper select their
students because it's easier to teach
let's say kids that have been screened
for IQ and conscientiousness but you
take everybody and yet your students
hyper perform on their examinations and
so so explain that in a little more
detail because that's that that really
pulls the rug out from underneath your
detractors except the ones who don't
believe in objective Merit yeah I mean
it's interesting because you hear strict
and of course lies with lots of people
people think tyrannical and unhappiness
and so on I always say that strict is
immersed in love and when you're strict
with with children it means you love
them enough to keep your standards high
for them and I would say that most right
teachers and parents nowadays want to be
friends with children and uh they don't
know that their duty is to have children
rise up and meet them where they are and
to demonstrate to them over and over
again what virtuous behavior is so that
they too can learn to be virtuous and
that when grandma's looking a bit sad
you say to the boy go and get her bring
her a cup of tea you explain that that
is what kindness is and every little
moment of kindness in the particular the
child is able to do over and over again
again there's no point in telling
children be kind I mean you can tell
them but they won't understand what that
means they need to see examples and
non-examples so the cup of tea is an
example but then their brother hits them
because he wants to take the toy and
that's an example of unkindness and you
would say well that was unkind and this
is kind over and over and over again and
over years I know you're interested in
evolutionary psychology this is what we
are as humans you know other animals
within a few weeks or a few months in
the in the jungle they get sorted and
off they go whereas human beings take
many many years uh to be able to survive
on their own without their parents and
the role of the parents and the role of
the teacher should be to show them the
particular over and over again whether
that's about gratitude or about Duty or
about kindness and so on and then
eventually they can move that to the
abstract and they'll understand what
kindness is having seen the particular
of examples and non-examples so many
times but sadly I think that people
generally don't understand that about
children and so for instance I know I've
often said to you when you came to the
school uh you know I said to you you
never talk about schools and um and you
said oh it's true I don't really talk
about schools and I said yeah well you
should talk about schools because
they're the most important institutions
in any country because children are the
future and so when all of you guys and
when I say guys I mean they're women too
like Barry Weiss or Megan Kelly or John
McWater or Glenn Lowry and all these
people who I have huge admiration for
huge admir generation for all of you
nobody ever talks about schools nobody
ever talks about the importance of our
education system and then what you all
do is you talk about what's going on in
the universities and you say oh my
goodness how come these young people
think as they do and how come we've got
all of these marches and so on and so
for things that are happening and we
think how come they're not thinking
about stuff in the way you know why
don't they why haven't they developed
critical thinking and this is where I
sort of have a bit of a bug bear with
you and I want to say to you you know I
want to explain why I think not just you
uh all these people I have huge
admiration for Jonathan height Abigail
shrier I read all of your stuff and I
love it but when it comes to children I
think you're all wrong Elon Musk the
other day I saw him you know on some
video he was talking about how to teach
children and he's wrong you're all wrong
and let me explain why the fact is
you're all wondering why it is these
students at University don't think in a
critical Manner and then what you all
say is what we need to do is teach them
how to think think not what to think but
you're wrong we need to teach them what
to think okay if as because what's
currently happening is we are teaching
them how to think and what does that
mean in fact I should ask you when when
you all say things like that teach them
how to think what do you mean well we
mean with this Peterson Academy that I'm
putting forward is that we don't want a
university and I'm speaking specifically
of universities to be an ideological
iCal propaganda Factory and so really
it's a dig at the radical left okay and
so and then I and and I would also say
I'll I'll say two things in response to
the other things you said um I have
talked privately with any number of
government officials especially on the
Republican side about the absolute
catastrophe that's unfolding in the K
through2 system and one of my dreams and
you can tell me what you think about
this is that I think that the right to
teacher certification should be taken
away from the faculties of Education
okay because I think they have done a
job that's so abysmal that it it's
almost Indescribable and I've talked to
plenty of Republican Governors about
this and it's one of my lifelong
Ambitions yes no I agree we'll 100%
agree on that teacher training
institutions are a disaster but okay and
it's really interesting what you said
you don't want this ideology just pumped
through kids and I 100% not at
universities that's not the same as K
through 12
you know I also agree with your approach
from the particular upward with regards
to children so that's crucial I know
it's just that when you all talk about
this business of teaching them how to
think what that looks like in a
classroom in a high school is that okay
so what that is is is the standard
discussion between Knowledge and Skills
should we teach them knowledge or should
we teach them skills how to think is a
skill and it can only be done within a c
a particular domain so uh I don't know
how to think about cars okay you told me
you put a car in front of me and said
create a different kind of car Katherine
be creative think outside the box I
wouldn't know what to do because I don't
know anything about cars but if you tell
me to turn education on its head I've
done exactly that I've been very radical
I've thought outside the box and I've
done things very differently why because
I know education inside out the only way
you can think in a creative manner or
think outside the box and have
independent thoughts about anything is
to know it really well and so that means
children at school level need to be
taught loads of knowledge so when you
all say things like we need to teach
them how to think I disagree with you
when I say we need to teach them what to
think what I mean by that is we need to
give them knowledge uh about the world
wars about slavery about colonialism
about all of these ideas that if they
don't have historical knowledge they're
unable to make a a a judgment that is
well informed and that isn't just going
to go down an ideological route you know
all children are communists okay they're
all Communists when you talk talk to
them they're all Communists because when
they hear about communism they go you
mean everybody's going to have equality
you mean everybody's we're going to
share and then you know everybody poor
and Rich doesn't happen anymore
everybody's just the same that's lovely
and the reason why children are
Communists is because they're naive
they're vulnerable and they it sounds
nice to them and so that's what they go
for they don't have enough knowledge or
enough wisdom to be able to make correct
decisions that's why for instance we ban
alcohol we ban
cigarettes I believe we should ban
smartphones we ban sex we ban marriage
we ban driving there are all kinds of
things that we Bann from children and
the thing about the libertarian right uh
while I myself believe in Freedom and I
believe in freedom of speech and all of
that when it comes to children I don't
believe in any of it I believe that
children need their freedoms restricted
so that later in life they can be truly
free and when I say their freedoms need
to be restricted that doesn't mean that
they're unhappy you saw at my school
just how happy they were so let me let
me ask you a clarifying question yeah do
you mean that their freedoms should be
restricted or do you mean that the
domain within which they have Freedom
should be restricted well no I I would
say both because those are different
right because the one tilts more to in
some sense conceptually towards control
see let let me give you an example you
tell me what you think about this this
is a very concrete example so it brings
it down to earth so imagine you have a
four-year-old child and he has a closet
full of clothes like 40 outfits to wear
and they're all hanging on uh um on
hangers and maybe he's a little hungry
and a little tired and you open up the
closet and you say what of which of
those outfits do you want to wear and he
has a meltdown okay and so imagine that
instead you take three of those items of
clothing off the hangers and you put
them on the bed and you say which of
those three pieces of clothing would you
like to wear and then he can point to
one with no problem it's like a so
there's a consumer Choice literature for
example that shows PE you that if you
have four shampoos to choose from on the
shelf and you pick one you're happier
with your purchase than you are if you
have 200 on the Shelf to pick from
because you drown in complexity and
you've probably made the wrong choice so
with children my sense is that you know
they need that play that enables them to
decide but adults are supposed to be
wise enough so that the domain of choice
that's presented to them is commensurate
with their actual emotional and
cognitive ability so well I'm wondering
what you think of that formulation yeah
I don't think the CH the four-year-old
should be choosing a tool I don't I
think you're in a rush you need to get
him to school get him in his clothes yes
there's that and sometimes that's the
case I'm in the supermarket and I'm
watching parents say darling what would
you like from the freezer to eat and I'm
looking at them thinking why are you
asking them just take what you want put
it in the basket and go you've got a
life you know like these children who
are the center of the world we need need
to ask them what they think about
everything we have to ask them what
would you like to eat put the spinach
and broccoli in front of them and tell
them to eat it and that's what we do at
Michaela they have one Cho they don't
have any choice at lunch they all eat
the same thing and we call it family
lunch and you had lunch with the
children why we why do we call it family
lunch because it's like family dinner
and why is what what used to happen at
family dinner I have to say I don't
think this happens anymore in many
households because everybody's on their
phone or their iPad and they take their
plate of food and they go and sit in
their bedroom but what should be
happening is that you sit around a table
and that you're being Ser you all serve
out the food and you're all eating from
one pot of food and if you don't like it
very much well you suck it up because
that's what it is to be a child okay and
you learn how to eat different foods
because your parents don't let you to
get away with this idea of I'm a free
human being and it's against my human
rights and I should be able to eat what
I want no you shouldn't be able to eat
what you want you're a child now look
that's why people call me strict but
it's because I love them that I think we
should be doing this because by doing
that we teach them how to become adults
be communal and you talk about exactly
you say how you don't want children you
shouldn't bring up children who you're
going to dislike well the more choices
and the more freedom you give them in
that sense the more you're going to
dislike them as adults I mean the fact
is you cannot be friends with your
children when they're children and be
friends with them when they're adults
you have to choose and you should not be
friends with them when they're children
cuz otherwise you're not going to be
you're not going to like them when
they're adults
you are in a position of authority and
you should be molding your child and
helping him with his moral formation and
giving him knowledge and the school
should be doing both as well both moral
formation and giving him knowledge and
where I worry about the libertarian
right is the the the freedoms that they
enjoy amongst adults they then impose
that on children or they don't realize
that that's what they're doing and then
they think oh my goodness but why is it
all these students University are
behaving the way that they do it's
because the schools have not taught them
what to think when I say what to think
giving them the facts about the various
world the world wars giving them the
facts about the history of their country
making them feel as if they belong in
their country and that their history
belongs to them that the geography of
their country is taught to them if on
the otherand the school is convinced
that actually what they need to do is um
teach them how to think and then nobody
can agree on what that looks like
because it's a skill and outside of its
domain of knowledge it cannot be taught
independently it's impossible all you
can do is give children knowledge you
see what those skills are is actually
bits of knowledge and when you give them
lots of bits of knowledge about say the
second world war they are then be able
to piece together what they think of it
now the problem we've got nowadays is
that the schools are teaching them with
a particular ideology in mind so in
Britain for instance I I I see very much
that history lessons in schools they
will be teaching about how the British
were really racist and how the Indian
soldiers who were fighting for Britain
were treated very badly and you know
what I'm not even saying that isn't true
but when it comes to secondary school
children who might have one or two
lessons a week in history and they're
only going to have it for a few years
wouldn't it be it shouldn't the Focus be
uh them knowing 1914 and 1918 shouldn't
the focus be them knowing about Hitler
in the Second World War I mean like like
there there there are certain facts that
the children they've never heard of the
battle of the S they've never heard of
um uh the the details of of the various
key battles in the first world war and
the second world war and they've never
heard of them because they're too busy
being taught stories that are
ideological which will convince them
that the British for instance are racist
or convince them that there were various
important female characters in our
historical history and that that's what
that's what matters and of course
Elizabeth the first absolutely but there
are there are other people that are
brought forward as being very important
when they're not so important but
because they're taught through an
ideological lens uh which is 2024 as
opposed to uh teaching them the basics
of their own history so that they can
feel that they are British
[Music]